
📊 Automatic Header Row Detection for Excel Files
🚀 Overview

This project implements a heuristic-based algorithm to automatically detect the header row in semi-structured Excel files.

In many real-world business spreadsheets, column headers are not located on the first row. Files often contain:

Titles

Metadata

Blank rows

Notes

Logos

This tool scans the top rows of a worksheet and determines which row most likely contains the column names.

The detected row is then automatically passed to pandas for structured data loading.

🎯 Problem Statement

Traditional pandas.read_excel() assumes the header is located at row 0.
In practice, this assumption frequently fails for business data.

The challenge:

Automatically detect the correct header row without manual inspection.

🧠 Algorithm Design

The solution uses a weighted heuristic scoring system based on four structural signals:

Feature	Description	Weight
Fill Ratio	Ratio of non-empty cells	×3
String Ratio	Proportion of text values	×4
Bold Ratio	Proportion of bold-formatted cells	×3
Depth Penalty	Penalizes rows further down	−0.1 × row index

Each row receives a composite score:

Score=3⋅FillRatio+4⋅StringRatio+3⋅BoldRatio−0.1⋅RowIndex
Score=3⋅FillRatio+4⋅StringRatio+3⋅BoldRatio−0.1⋅RowIndex

The row with the highest score is selected as the header.

🔎 Why These Features?
1️⃣ Fill Ratio

Headers typically populate most columns.

2️⃣ String Ratio

Column names are generally text-based, unlike data rows that contain numbers or mixed types.

3️⃣ Bold Formatting

Headers are often visually emphasized in professional spreadsheets.

4️⃣ Positional Prior

Headers usually appear near the top of the file.

⚙️ Implementation
Header Detection Function
def detect_header_row(filepath, max_rows_to_scan=30):
Workflow

Load Excel file using openpyxl

Scan first N rows (default = 30)

Compute weighted score per row

Select row with highest score

Load dataframe using detected header

Example Usage
header_line = detect_header_row("file.xlsx")
df = pd.read_excel("file.xlsx", header=header_line - 1)

⚠ Note: openpyxl uses 1-based indexing, while pandas uses 0-based indexing.

📈 Time Complexity

Let:

n = number of scanned rows (≤ 30)

m = number of columns

Time complexity:

O(n × m)

The algorithm is efficient and scalable for large spreadsheets.

🏗 Architecture
Excel File
     ↓
Row Scan (Top N Rows)
     ↓
Feature Extraction
     ↓
Weighted Scoring
     ↓
Best Row Selection
     ↓
Pandas DataFrame Load
✅ Strengths

Fully interpretable heuristic model

No training data required

Fast and lightweight

Works on real-world business files

Seamless Pandas integration

Formatting-aware detection (bold support)

🔬 When to Use This

Ideal for:

Data preprocessing pipelines

Automated ETL workflows

Business data ingestion systems

Internship / analytics projects involving messy Excel data

🔮 Possible Improvements

Multi-sheet support

Confidence score thresholding

Additional statistical features (numeric variance, uniqueness ratio)

Hybrid ML-based enhancement

Logging & debugging mode

📦 Dependencies
pip install openpyxl pandas
🧪 Example Use Case

Before:

Row 1: Company Report 2024
Row 2: Confidential
Row 3: (blank)
Row 4: Date | Client | Revenue | Region   ← Actual header
Row 5+: Data rows

After running detection:

df = pd.read_excel(file, header=3)

Correctly structured dataframe without manual inspection.

🎓 Learning Outcomes

This project demonstrates:

Heuristic algorithm design

Feature engineering for semi-structured data

Excel metadata extraction

Practical data engineering problem-solving

Clean integration between openpyxl and pandas

📌 Technical Summary

This project implements a:

Semi-structure-aware heuristic scoring system for dynamic header detection in spreadsheet data.

It leverages structural, statistical, and formatting signals to robustly identify column headers in real-world Excel files.
